Welcome to the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction
today. A presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association. And now,
your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane, Keith Johnson, and David Carson, and the subject of this
show will be First Contact. For over a century, at least since H.G. Wells' War
of the Worlds, contact with aliens has been one of the standard motifs of
science fiction, and certainly one of the most popular. There are, of course, a
number of possibilities coming under the heading of alien contact. The aliens
may be superior, we may be superior, or there may be equality. The aliens might
be friendly, hostile, or indifferent. One of the most popular and fascinating
possibilities of all is the story of First Contact, one in which the first
meeting between humans and aliens is treated. Our present show will be the first
of two on the subject of First Contact. I wish I
could convey the atmosphere, the background of this fantastic scene. Hundreds of
cars are parked in a field in back of us, and the police are trying to rope off
the roadway leading into the farm, but it's no use. They're breaking right
through. The car's headlights throw an enormous spotlight on the pit where the
objects half buried. now some of the more daring stories now are venturing near
the edge stand out against the metal team one man wants to touch the thing he's
having an argument with a policeman now the policeman wins now ladies and
gentlemen there's something I haven't mentioned in all this excitement but it's
becoming more distinct perhaps you've caught it already on your radio listen
please do
you hear it the curious humming sound that seems to come from inside the object
I'll move the microphone nearer here now
we're not more than 25 feet away can you hear it now? Professor Pearson, yes can
you tell us the meaning of that scraping noise inside the thing? Possibly the
unequal cooling of its surface. I say do you still think it's a meteor professor?
Metal
casing is definitely extraterrestrial not found on this earth. Friction with the
earth's atmosphere usually tears holes in a meteorite. This thing is moving you
can see it's lindical. Something happening ladies and gentlemen. This terrific
this end of the thing is beginning to flake off. The top is beginning to rotate
like a screw and the thing must be hollow. Move it! Keep
those idiots back! Stand back!
Ladies and gentlemen, this is the most terrifying thing I've ever
witnessed. Wait a minute someone's calling out one or something. I can see turning
out of that black hole two luminous disks of the eyes. It might be a face might
be almost but heavens something wriggling out of the shadow like a gray snake
now it's another one and another one and another one they look like tentacles to
me. Oh yeah I can see the thing's body now it's large and large as a bear. It
glistens like wet leather but that face. Ladies and gentlemen it's indescribable
I can hardly force myself to keep looking at it. It's so awful the eyes are black
and they gleam like a serpent. The mouth is a kind of V-shaped with
saliva dripping from its rimless lips. It seems to quiver and pulsate
and the monster or whatever it is can hardly move. It seems weighed down by
possibly gravity or something. The thing's rising up now and the crowd falls back.
There's seen plenty the most extraordinary experience for these gentlemen. I
can't find words. Well I'll pull this microphone with me as I talk. I'll have to
stop the description until I can take a new position. Hold on will you please?
I'll be right back in a minute. Of course Wells started the tradition of the
alien being both physically repulsive and hostile to human beings, and the pulp
magazines picked it up through the late 20s and the early 30s into the 40. The
characteristic way of treating an alien was as a so-called bug-eyed monster. Then
the movies picked it up and carried that on through the 50s and meantime the
literature took a different trend.
In the 30s around 1934 Stanley Weinbaum published a story which was one of the
landmarks in science fiction literature and it was entitled The Modern Martian
Odyssey and it was the first treatment in the modern period of aliens as
sensitive creatures ones who were not hostile or aggressive who had an
environment and ecology of their own. It took place on Mars and Weinbaum created
three or four different types of aliens on the planet and it's interesting for
us to go back and read those about those aliens because they were all based on
the science of his day. For instance one of them was a silicon creature. They knew
that, well, they figured Mars was made up of sand so one of the aliens that
Weinbaum developed for the planet was one who ate sand. This is quite possible.
There are two kinds of chemicals that can support life and carbon and silicon
are the two where carbon based and silicon life is possible and as Asimov
pointed out with Weinbaum he said he was the first one in the history of science
fiction to develop an environment for an alien conceiving of him as having come
from a non-earth environment as being part of an ecology which was non-human
having thought processes which were non-human having a logical system which was
non-human and Weinbaum of course also made one of his aliens anyhow a creature
named Tweel very friendly a non-hostile, non-aggressive alien which was very
different from the bug-eyed monster tradition and it went over very well.
Weinbaum was in his late 20s when that story was published and there was an
immediate market and immediate imitators doing that kind of story an alien who
was who was non-aggressive with whom contact could be established and as I said
that was in the it was in 1934 in Wonder Stories when Weinbaum wrote that
landmark story.
There are several different kinds of first contact and we're going to be talking
about most of them in this treatment one of that being mankind's first encounter
with alien beings are mankind and several brother alien races coming in contact
with a new alien race. Yeah I think that has to be the criterion that no matter
how many aliens have been contacted there still is that special feeling about
meeting up with a brand new alien culture and the humans have to be involved
with it. Of course no matter if they're along with other aliens or not I think
that has to be the you know the main criterion of alien contact of course the
meeting up with the race. The original, the first race, is the most exciting and
most most important one because up until that time the human race doesn't even
know whether there are other races in existence presumably after one has been in
existence then the rest you kind of assume are going to be there usually a first
contact story will be very much tied to its particular culture or historical era.
Today for instance we're very much tied up with more sophisticated approaches or
more sophisticated environments for it simply because we are expecting it to
happen but way back in the 30s and 40s you know not long after the days of the
bug-eyed monster motifs many of the stories about first contact would be tied to
what was happening in the world for instance wars racial aggressions and so
forth. After all an alien is a, another race is alien.
Xenophobia or hatred of strangers for instance you know can take place within
the human race not just with with alien creatures. In probably the one of the
best first contact stories of all by Murray Leinster entitled appropriately
appropriately enough first contact a spaceship meets up with another well a
spaceship from earth meets up with a spaceship from another culture the first
time that any kind of alien has ever been contacted and one of the things that
happens in the story before they actually meet, the humans on their ship are
discussing and worrying and wondering about what kinds of creatures are going to
meet and Leinster has one of the characters say this. What are we going to do
about them? Maybe these creatures will be aesthetic marvels nice and friendly and
polite and underneath with the sneaking brutal ferocity of a Japanese? Now you
obviously know that was written during the middle 40s during the Second World
War when the Japanese were our enemy but you'll find that often to be a motif of
the first contact story but I remember that story did have a happy ending. They
did they did Leinster speculated that perhaps there would be friendliness
between the two cultures. The way he did that was fairly clever though. Wasn't
that the case in which the two different crews actually switched spaceships so
they went back to each other's planets in each other's spaceships and avoided
revealing too much about themselves that way? Yeah that's one of the problems
you'll meet in many first contact stories that we don't want them to know where
we are and presumably they wouldn't want us to know where they are, and so one
particular branch of the first contact story is when the two cultures the humans
and the aliens meet somewhere in a neutral space and the whole subject of that
first contact story was the aliens and the humans were wondering how can we keep
them from knowing where we come from. Another way an author might introduce a
first contact story would be in the way that how Clement designed his story
Needle written in 1950 that being that it's a first contact story in reverse.
It's the story of an alien making first contact with people on earth and the
alien in this particular story is his form is alien but his feelings his motives
his emotions are very much human. Therefore that the reader is able to empathize
with him and his plight. The alien is more or less a detective and he is chasing
a criminal and the alien's form is a small gelatinous mass and they work in a
parasitic relationship with a host and that's how the contact is made. The the
alien hero inhabits the body of a of a young man and they through various
methods are able to contact and communicate with each other and then they go off
in search of the criminal and eventually find and dispose of him. You think
that's fair? You said that the alien was more or less had human feelings. You
mentioned the fact he was chasing a criminal. To me a good first contact story a
good story about aliens must have a a credible alien. I mean surely some creature
developing on another planet another galaxy would have a whole system of logic a
whole feelings if they had feelings at all and were totally non-human. In fact it
probably would be very difficult to understand him from the basis of our
psychology. The trouble is it's much more it's much easier for a writer to create
say a bug-eyed monster than to try and create an alien and his whole ecology and
his whole society simultaneously and make it credibly different from human
society. It's a tough thing because we're all humans. I think the early the early
presentation of the aliens you know what we would call unsophisticated I think
they almost had to do that. I mean an alien was usually something that looked
weird but felt like a human being right. And quite often they emphasized physical
or physiological characteristics he's alien because he's got five arms and three
heads and so forth and they didn't consider things like his psychology. Later on
this became a little bit more evident. In fact a lot of different parts of human
culture were considered in the first contact stories. For example even religion
in the case of James Blish's Case of Conscience in which an entire planet
according to what Blish is trying to make us believe has been created by the
adversary by Satan and the the aliens on this reptilian though they may be are
perfect creatures who have not evidently have not been involved in original sin.
They're still living in essentially a garden of Eden sort of thing and the
reaction of the human protagonist to this is the focus of the novel. The aliens
on the planet were reptilian or like small dinosaurs. They were like they were
like a race of Vulcans, Mr. Spock's from Star Trek, in that they used pure reason
that's one of the things that bothered the protagonist, the Jesuit priest, is that
they had a perfect society a perfect culture yet they had no such thing as faith
no such thing as religion no very in fact very unemotional in fact no emotions.
Right. They went totally unreason and they had a perfect culture. Yes and to the
priest that shook the very foundations of his faith because to have religion to
have faith you have to have faith and these these creatures did not you did not
know what that was. Right. So it was a crisis of conscience for him. The ending of
that novel you might remember was very ambiguous. I think Blish intended for for
that to be so. Yes the planet was created out of an element lithium I believe
that was inherently unstable, and when an earthman landed on the planet or
started to set up factories of a certain kind on the planet to use this lithium
ore either he created either he caused the planet to disintegrate or to blow up
or the priest at the end of the novel exorcises the planet and it disappears and
the you don't you are not told which actually was effective in the destruction
of the alien race. Some readers might find that novel a bit slow but I think it's
a fascinating treatment and probably more than I would say more than 90% of the
first contact stories and novels that have been written I think it's probably
truer to the some of the feelings that the human race will have when we actually
do make first contact. I think one of the first problems the human race will have
is, are these creatures created by God? Do they have souls you know given the fact
they have intelligence yet do they have souls? I think it's very easy here to see
an analogy between the the explorers of the old world the Spanish particularly
when they came to the new world and discovered the Indian cultures. They they had
philosophical theological debates on whether these creatures these Indians had
souls you know they could kill them and say well there's nothing wrong with this.
They're animals they don't have souls. I think we're going to have that problem
when we do run across aliens it's going to be a religious problem and I think
Blish's book A Case of Conscience is probably the well is the classic treatment
of that particular aspect of first contact. Another value or another insight that
a first contact story can give people is to put a perspective on the human race.
Of course we think of ourselves usually as the center of the universe. We think
of ourselves as being the most intelligent creatures at least on this planet if
not in the universe or the galaxy and there are a number of first contact
stories in which we learn humility. One of the best I think is Gordon R. Dickson's
Dolphin's Way published in the mid-60s. John Varley's universe a good part of it
or the background in many of his books comes from a similar idea. A group of, a
race of, super powerful invading beings has taken over the earth and has decided
to contact the most intelligent species which in this case are dolphins and
killer whales. In fact we learn at one point in one of his novels that the
invaders classify human intelligence or classify terrestrial intelligences on
three levels. There are the intelligent ones which are dolphins and killer whales.
There are hive mines or levels
in which groups of species can work together like an ant colony or a termite
colony and he groups human beings along with these. Human beings are not
intelligent individually according to this classification. And on the third level
are animals. And that's a very humiliating thing. The invaders wipe out
civilization on the earth completely human civilization anyway without even
stopping to worry about it and they don't even contact human beings. Usually in
most of these first contact stories, even if the contact is negative that is the
humans are made into an inferior race or are shown as an inferior race compared
to the aliens, at least there is some kind of communication possibilities. In
truth it might be it might be the case that an alien would be so different from
human beings we wouldn't even be able to communicate with them. Their
psychologies would be so different that we'd have no common meeting ground or
the technology on both sides or the lack of it may be such that there could be
no medium for communication. Yes their technology may be so far ahead of ours
that we don't even think the same as they do. I think one of the more interesting
treatments in first contact would be Stanislaw Lem's Solaris in that mankind has
found a planet orbiting around a binary star system but the planet's orbit is
stable which would be impossible so they go to the planet to investigate why
this planet's orbit is stable and find out that the ocean on this planet which
comprises most of the planet except for a few islands is senient or intelligent
so they set up stations and start trying to communicate with the planet and
therein lies the crux of the story. The hero Kris Kelvin has landed on a space
station orbiting Solaris and it has a few members of the crew left alive, a Dr.
Snow and a Dr. Satorius. They both are in essence hiding out in certain parts of
the ship and staying closed away from any other from each other and Kelvin has
the responsibility or the obligation of finding out why all this is going on.
During the early part of Kelvin's stay on the space station, his dead wife Rheya
is materialized on board the ship by the ocean Solaris. He is immediately
horrified and finds a way to get rid of his first wife by sending her off in a
ship, and about a day or two after that happens, his wife is rematerialized on the
ship. This time her body is not composed of atoms and molecules the way we know
them. It's composed of neutrinos being extremely dense but aside from that makeup
of her form she is totally human in every respect and is deeply in love with him.
His wife had committed suicide previously because Kelvin had left her and she in
essence died of loneliness. There ensues a type of morality play in which Kelvin
tries to deduce why his wife has materialized at this particular time and space
and
there's several levels to the story at this point in which Kelvin is trying to
figure out why she got there, how she got there, why all this is happening at this
particular point in time, and he finally deduces that it was the ocean which
materialized his wife because his wife has knowledge which she would not have
normally had had she been alive, had she been a living person, an entity. She had
knowledge of Kelvin's some of his innermost thoughts which he had kept secret
from his wife while she was alive. And in the end of the story
even though Kelvin can communicate with the creation of Solaris, he cannot
communicate with Solaris itself, the concepts, the thought processes, or emotions
if there are any of this being which is literally an ocean on this entire planet
are so far from that of human emotions and thought processes, that there can be
no direct contact. And the enigma of Solaris at the beginning of the book is left
the same at the end of the book. You'd probably call that a thought novel
wouldn't you more or less on the. It's very much I would call psychological
science fiction. Yeah psychological, but it's not so much the action the typical
hero or heroine but the
possibilities. Yeah the psychological interplay between the two cultures and so
forth.
One of the more intelligently written first contact stories to come out recently
was A Mote in God's Eye by Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle and Keith Johnson has a
critique on that book. Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle have collaborated on several
works. The Mote in God's Eye is perhaps their most successful effort. It is a
return to the bug-eyed monster theme but with some significant differences from
the usual treatments. The plot is an exciting and complex one so much so that the
reader will probably not pick up every twist upon the first reading. The action
takes place in the future history that has been constructed by Pournelle. Mankind
has spread out among the stars. He has started wars and built up empires and at
the time of Mote has begun rebuilding a new empire from the ashes of the most
recent galaxy-wide conflict but then the monster arrives. She is not recognized
as a monster upon arrival. Not until books end do the protagonists realize that
this totally alien species that they have met is the deadly enemy of all humans.
This terrible secret is revealed gradually piece by piece to the reader in a
very Hitchcockian way. That first alien visitor has come into human space on the
wings of a solar sail after a very long journey. Human beings do not learn a
great deal from the creature, however, largely because she is dead by the time
they pick her up. So the empire decides to send a scientific and military
expedition to the planet inhabited by the alien race. The expedition is
commandeered by a character who is a cross between George Patton and Nikita
Khrushchev. His characterization provokes some humor in places. The captain of a
second ship Rod Blaine is the real hero however and he undergoes some unusual
and suspenseful adventures. His crew meets the aliens, talks with them, studies
them, and becomes rather friendly with them. In fact before too long the captain
finds his ship overrun with aliens, very small ones. You see the aliens come in
several versions there are administrators and ambassador types, there are strong
stupid farmers, and small dexterous doctors. These are not simply different
occupations they are completely separate subspecies of the alien race. On earth
the situation would be similar if gorillas had evolved a low level of human
intelligence and become farmers, orangutans had become electrical engineers, and
chimpanzees had become jet pilots. We humans of course would be the
administrators or perhaps we would be professional warriors. This is one of the
aliens deadly secrets. One of their forms is made up of a powerful vicious set of
super soldiers who could make the alien equivalent of mincemeat out of any human
military man but there is a more terrible fact concealed by the aliens and that
is overpopulation. Every alien must be made pregnant periodically or she will die.
This has of course led to terrible overcrowding on the planet so much so that
periodically civilization has blasted itself back to savagery. The planet has
gone through thousands of these cycles of growth and catastrophe. That pattern
has imbued the race with a deep frustrating fatalism, a sense of futility, that
makes their psychology very different from that of us humans. At one point a crew
member who has stumbled across the secret exclaims to one of the creatures but
man there's got to be a way to solve this to which the alien replies I am not a
man and there doesn't got to be a way and that's another reason I don't want
contact between your species and mine. You're all crazy. You think every problem
has a solution. The action is fast throughout the novel. The crew of Captain
Blaine's ship have interesting adventures with the friendly aliens. Three of his
crewmen are unknowingly abandoned on the planet and have some hair-raising
adventures with unfriendly aliens ending in their deaths. The unsuspecting
expedition returns home. They even bring three of the beings with them, but in
true space opera fashion the heroes uncover the truth by means of their human
cleverness and isolate the aliens in their home system and the novel ends as do
many of Niven's works somewhat inconclusively. The book offers several
fascinating new concepts and more than a few contrasting features. Perhaps these
are a result of the dual authorship. The empire is dreadfully old-fashioned. It is
modeled after a 15th century monarchy with its hierarchical structure. Women are
worshipped in a way that must have set Ursula Le Guin's teeth on edge. There is a
distinct flavor of space opera in the action, yet there are some recent social
issues incorporated in the book. The overpopulation problem of the aliens is
probably Niven's idea of the dangers that face human society before the end of
the century today. Again the aliens are old-fashioned monsters, even if nobody
realizes it at first. We are led to understand why they are monstrous, however,
almost to the point of sympathizing with them. One of the most difficult tasks in
the writing of science fiction is the construction of a truly alien being.
Pournelle and Niven have done an admirable job. The novel is not without flaws.
Human society is depressingly similar to today's version of it, and there are
some funny anachronisms which I suspect my colleagues will bring up in a few
moments, but for imaginative invention and excitement, The Mote in God's Eye will
fit on anyone's bookshelf.
Niven and Pournelle have done something very interesting in that book. Earlier we
had all of us recognized and mentioned that there's been an increase in
sophistication from the early treatment of aliens as bug-eyed monsters into
evolving through a Weinbaum story where they are friendly and non-aggressive.
This in a sense is a return to the bug-eyed monster. They don't look like bug
-eyed monsters. In fact some of the humans if I remember almost want to pet them
because they have soft fur in their bodies, but on the other hand their exterior
appearance belies a very hostile intention toward humans so in a sense this is
going backwards. Another interesting fact or what sophisticated or clever thing
that Niven and Pournelle have done in the book is the levels of comparative
intelligence between the humans and the Moties as I believe they're called in the
book because they come from the Mote. When you come right down to it the Moties or
the aliens were more intelligent than the humans were. Very much so. It was only
the lack of an interstellar drive I think that had caused them to you know had
them remain in their own little section of the galaxy. Bottled up in their own
solar system. Yes in fact it was kind of an interesting twist. Quite often we read
about galactic empires, Asimov's and many others, in which the well I guess not
Asimov's but others, in which the human beings are asked whether they want to join
this benevolent galaxy wide empire and here it's the other way around. The aliens
still are more intelligent and more competent than we are but they're asking
whether they can join our empire.
This is Daryl Lane Keith Johnson and David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association in conjunction with Odessa College and KOCV-FM.